# This file was autogenerated by uv via the following command:
#    uv pip compile --python-version 3.9 --python-platform linux hail/python/dev/requirements.txt --output-file=hail/python/dev/pinned-requirements.txt
aiohttp==3.9.5
    # via aiohttp-devtools
aiohttp-devtools==1.1.2
aiosignal==1.3.1
    # via aiohttp
alabaster==0.7.16
    # via sphinx
anyio==4.3.0
    # via
    #   httpx
    #   jupyter-server
    #   watchfiles
argon2-cffi==23.1.0
    # via jupyter-server
argon2-cffi-bindings==21.2.0
    # via argon2-cffi
arrow==1.3.0
    # via isoduration
astroid==2.15.8
    # via pylint
asttokens==2.4.1
    # via
    #   devtools
    #   stack-data
async-lru==2.0.4
    # via jupyterlab
async-timeout==4.0.3
    # via aiohttp
attrs==23.2.0
    # via
    #   aiohttp
    #   curlylint
    #   jsonschema
    #   referencing
babel==2.14.0
    # via
    #   jupyterlab-server
    #   sphinx
beautifulsoup4==4.12.3
    # via nbconvert
bleach==6.1.0
    # via nbconvert
build==1.1.1
certifi==2024.2.2
    # via
    #   httpcore
    #   httpx
    #   requests
cffi==1.16.0
    # via argon2-cffi-bindings
cfgv==3.4.0
    # via pre-commit
charset-normalizer==3.3.2
    # via requests
click==8.1.7
    # via
    #   aiohttp-devtools
    #   curlylint
comm==0.2.2
    # via
    #   ipykernel
    #   ipywidgets
curlylint==0.13.1
debugpy==1.8.1
    # via ipykernel
decorator==4.4.2
    # via ipython
defusedxml==0.7.1
    # via nbconvert
devtools==0.12.2
    # via aiohttp-devtools
dill==0.3.8
    # via pylint
distlib==0.3.8
    # via virtualenv
docutils==0.18.1
    # via
    #   nbsphinx
    #   sphinx
    #   sphinx-rtd-theme
exceptiongroup==1.2.1
    # via
    #   anyio
    #   ipython
    #   pytest
execnet==2.1.1
    # via pytest-xdist
executing==2.0.1
    # via
    #   devtools
    #   stack-data
fastjsonschema==2.19.1
    # via nbformat
filelock==3.13.4
    # via virtualenv
fqdn==1.5.1
    # via jsonschema
frozenlist==1.4.1
    # via
    #   aiohttp
    #   aiosignal
fswatch==0.1.1
h11==0.14.0
    # via httpcore
httpcore==1.0.5
    # via httpx
httpx==0.27.0
    # via jupyterlab
identify==2.5.36
    # via pre-commit
idna==3.7
    # via
    #   anyio
    #   httpx
    #   jsonschema
    #   requests
    #   yarl
imagesize==1.4.1
    # via sphinx
importlib-metadata==7.1.0
    # via
    #   build
    #   jupyter-client
    #   jupyter-lsp
    #   jupyterlab
    #   jupyterlab-server
    #   nbconvert
    #   sphinx
iniconfig==2.0.0
    # via pytest
ipykernel==6.29.4
    # via
    #   jupyter
    #   jupyter-console
    #   jupyterlab
    #   qtconsole
ipython==8.18.1
    # via
    #   ipykernel
    #   ipywidgets
    #   jupyter-console
ipywidgets==8.1.2
    # via jupyter
isoduration==20.11.0
    # via jsonschema
isort==5.13.2
    # via pylint
jedi==0.19.1
    # via ipython
jinja2==3.1.3
    # via
    #   jupyter-server
    #   jupyterlab
    #   jupyterlab-server
    #   nbconvert
    #   nbsphinx
    #   sphinx
json5==0.9.25
    # via jupyterlab-server
jsonpointer==2.4
    # via jsonschema
jsonschema==4.21.1
    # via
    #   jupyter-events
    #   jupyterlab-server
    #   nbformat
jsonschema-specifications==2023.12.1
    # via jsonschema
jupyter==1.0.0
jupyter-client==8.6.1
    # via
    #   ipykernel
    #   jupyter-console
    #   jupyter-server
    #   nbclient
    #   qtconsole
jupyter-console==6.6.3
    # via jupyter
jupyter-core==5.7.2
    # via
    #   ipykernel
    #   jupyter-client
    #   jupyter-console
    #   jupyter-server
    #   jupyterlab
    #   nbclient
    #   nbconvert
    #   nbformat
    #   qtconsole
jupyter-events==0.10.0
    # via jupyter-server
jupyter-lsp==2.2.5
    # via jupyterlab
jupyter-server==2.14.0
    # via
    #   jupyter-lsp
    #   jupyterlab
    #   jupyterlab-server
    #   notebook
    #   notebook-shim
jupyter-server-terminals==0.5.3
    # via jupyter-server
jupyterlab==4.1.7
    # via notebook
jupyterlab-pygments==0.3.0
    # via nbconvert
jupyterlab-server==2.27.1
    # via
    #   jupyterlab
    #   notebook
jupyterlab-widgets==3.0.10
    # via ipywidgets
lazy-object-proxy==1.10.0
    # via astroid
markupsafe==2.1.5
    # via
    #   jinja2
    #   nbconvert
matplotlib-inline==0.1.7
    # via
    #   ipykernel
    #   ipython
mccabe==0.7.0
    # via pylint
mistune==3.0.2
    # via nbconvert
multidict==6.0.5
    # via
    #   aiohttp
    #   yarl
nbclient==0.10.0
    # via nbconvert
nbconvert==7.13.1
    # via
    #   jupyter
    #   jupyter-server
    #   nbsphinx
nbformat==5.10.4
    # via
    #   jupyter-server
    #   nbclient
    #   nbconvert
    #   nbsphinx
nbsphinx==0.9.3
nest-asyncio==1.6.0
    # via ipykernel
nodeenv==1.8.0
    # via
    #   pre-commit
    #   pyright
notebook==7.1.3
    # via jupyter
notebook-shim==0.2.4
    # via
    #   jupyterlab
    #   notebook
overrides==7.7.0
    # via jupyter-server
packaging==24.0
    # via
    #   build
    #   ipykernel
    #   jupyter-server
    #   jupyterlab
    #   jupyterlab-server
    #   nbconvert
    #   pytest
    #   qtconsole
    #   qtpy
    #   sphinx
pandocfilters==1.5.1
    # via nbconvert
parso==0.8.4
    # via jedi
parsy==1.1.0
    # via curlylint
pathspec==0.12.1
    # via curlylint
pexpect==4.9.0
    # via ipython
pillow==10.3.0
platformdirs==4.2.1
    # via
    #   jupyter-core
    #   pylint
    #   virtualenv
pluggy==1.5.0
    # via pytest
pre-commit==3.7.0
prometheus-client==0.20.0
    # via jupyter-server
prompt-toolkit==3.0.43
    # via
    #   ipython
    #   jupyter-console
psutil==5.9.8
    # via ipykernel
ptyprocess==0.7.0
    # via
    #   pexpect
    #   terminado
pure-eval==0.2.2
    # via stack-data
py==1.11.0
    # via pytest-forked
pycparser==2.22
    # via cffi
pygments==2.17.2
    # via
    #   aiohttp-devtools
    #   devtools
    #   ipython
    #   jupyter-console
    #   nbconvert
    #   qtconsole
    #   sphinx
pylint==2.17.7
pyproject-hooks==1.0.0
    # via build
pyright==1.1.360
pytest==7.4.4
    # via
    #   pytest-asyncio
    #   pytest-forked
    #   pytest-html
    #   pytest-instafail
    #   pytest-metadata
    #   pytest-timeout
    #   pytest-xdist
pytest-asyncio==0.21.1
pytest-forked==1.6.0
    # via pytest-xdist
pytest-html==1.22.1
pytest-instafail==0.5.0
pytest-metadata==3.1.1
    # via pytest-html
pytest-timeout==2.3.1
pytest-timestamper==0.0.10
pytest-xdist==2.5.0
python-dateutil==2.9.0.post0
    # via
    #   arrow
    #   jupyter-client
python-json-logger==2.0.7
    # via jupyter-events
pyyaml==6.0.1
    # via
    #   jupyter-events
    #   pre-commit
pyzmq==26.0.2
    # via
    #   ipykernel
    #   jupyter-client
    #   jupyter-console
    #   jupyter-server
    #   qtconsole
qtconsole==5.5.1
    # via jupyter
qtpy==2.4.1
    # via qtconsole
referencing==0.35.0
    # via
    #   jsonschema
    #   jsonschema-specifications
    #   jupyter-events
requests==2.31.0
    # via
    #   jupyterlab-server
    #   sphinx
rfc3339-validator==0.1.4
    # via
    #   jsonschema
    #   jupyter-events
rfc3986-validator==0.1.1
    # via
    #   jsonschema
    #   jupyter-events
rpds-py==0.18.0
    # via
    #   jsonschema
    #   referencing
ruff==0.1.13
send2trash==1.8.3
    # via jupyter-server
setuptools==69.5.1
    # via nodeenv
six==1.16.0
    # via
    #   asttokens
    #   bleach
    #   python-dateutil
    #   rfc3339-validator
sniffio==1.3.1
    # via
    #   anyio
    #   httpx
snowballstemmer==2.2.0
    # via sphinx
soupsieve==2.5
    # via beautifulsoup4
sphinx==6.2.1
    # via
    #   nbsphinx
    #   sphinx-autodoc-typehints
    #   sphinx-rtd-theme
    #   sphinxcontrib-jquery
    #   sphinxcontrib-katex
sphinx-autodoc-typehints==1.23.0
sphinx-rtd-theme==1.3.0
sphinxcontrib-applehelp==1.0.8
    # via sphinx
sphinxcontrib-devhelp==1.0.6
    # via sphinx
sphinxcontrib-htmlhelp==2.0.5
    # via sphinx
sphinxcontrib-jquery==4.1
    # via sphinx-rtd-theme
sphinxcontrib-jsmath==1.0.1
    # via sphinx
sphinxcontrib-katex==0.9.9
sphinxcontrib-qthelp==1.0.7
    # via sphinx
sphinxcontrib-serializinghtml==1.1.10
    # via sphinx
stack-data==0.6.3
    # via ipython
terminado==0.18.1
    # via
    #   jupyter-server
    #   jupyter-server-terminals
tinycss2==1.3.0
    # via nbconvert
toml==0.10.2
    # via curlylint
tomli==2.0.1
    # via
    #   build
    #   jupyterlab
    #   pylint
    #   pyproject-hooks
    #   pytest
tomlkit==0.12.4
    # via pylint
tornado==6.4
    # via
    #   ipykernel
    #   jupyter-client
    #   jupyter-server
    #   jupyterlab
    #   notebook
    #   terminado
traitlets==5.14.3
    # via
    #   comm
    #   ipykernel
    #   ipython
    #   ipywidgets
    #   jupyter-client
    #   jupyter-console
    #   jupyter-core
    #   jupyter-events
    #   jupyter-server
    #   jupyterlab
    #   matplotlib-inline
    #   nbclient
    #   nbconvert
    #   nbformat
    #   nbsphinx
    #   qtconsole
types-chardet==5.0.4.6
types-decorator==5.1.8.20240310
types-deprecated==1.2.9.20240311
types-pymysql==1.1.0.20240425
types-python-dateutil==2.9.0.20240316
    # via arrow
types-pyyaml==6.0.12.20240311
types-requests==2.31.0.6
types-setuptools==69.5.0.20240423
types-six==1.16.21.20240425
types-tabulate==0.9.0.20240106
types-urllib3==1.26.25.14
    # via types-requests
typing-extensions==4.11.0
    # via
    #   anyio
    #   astroid
    #   async-lru
    #   ipython
    #   pylint
uri-template==1.3.0
    # via jsonschema
urllib3==1.26.18
    # via requests
uv==0.1.38
virtualenv==20.26.0
    # via pre-commit
watchfiles==0.21.0
    # via aiohttp-devtools
wcwidth==0.2.13
    # via prompt-toolkit
webcolors==1.13
    # via jsonschema
webencodings==0.5.1
    # via
    #   bleach
    #   tinycss2
websocket-client==1.8.0
    # via jupyter-server
widgetsnbextension==4.0.10
    # via ipywidgets
wrapt==1.16.0
    # via astroid
yarl==1.9.4
    # via aiohttp
zipp==3.18.1
    # via importlib-metadata
