hail/python/hail/docs/experimental/index.rst, before:

Experimental
============

This module serves two functions: as a staging area for extensions of Hail
not ready for inclusion in the main package, and as a library of lightly reviewed
community submissions.

At present, the experimental module is organized into a few freestanding
modules, linked immediately below, and many freestanding functions, documented
on this page.

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    ldscsim

Contribution Guidelines
-----------------------
Submissions from the community are welcome! The criteria for inclusion in the
experimental module are loose and subject to change:

1. Function docstrings are required. Hail uses
   `NumPy style docstrings <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/stable/usage/extensions/example_numpy.html>`__.
2. Tests are not required, but are encouraged. If you do include tests, they must
   run in no more than a few seconds. Place tests as a class method on ``Tests`` in
   ``python/tests/experimental/test_experimental.py``
3. Code style is not strictly enforced, aside from egregious violations. We do
   recommend using `autopep8 <https://pypi.org/project/autopep8/>`__ though!

.. currentmodule:: hail.experimental

Annotation Database
-------------------

.. rubric:: Classes

.. autosummary::
    :nosignatures:
    :toctree: ./
    :template: class.rst

    hail.experimental.DB

Genetics Methods
----------------

.. autosummary::

    load_dataset
    ld_score
    ld_score_regression
    write_expression
    read_expression
    filtering_allele_frequency
    hail_metadata
    plot_roc_curve
    phase_by_transmission
    phase_trio_matrix_by_transmission
    explode_trio_matrix
    import_gtf
    get_gene_intervals
    export_entries_by_col
    pc_project

`dplyr`-inspired Methods
------------------------

.. autosummary::

    gather
    separate
    spread

Functions
---------

.. autofunction:: load_dataset
.. autofunction:: ld_score
.. autofunction:: ld_score_regression
.. autofunction:: write_expression
.. autofunction:: read_expression
.. autofunction:: hail_metadata
.. autofunction:: plot_roc_curve
.. autofunction:: filtering_allele_frequency
.. autofunction:: phase_by_transmission
.. autofunction:: phase_trio_matrix_by_transmission
.. autofunction:: explode_trio_matrix
.. autofunction:: import_gtf
.. autofunction:: get_gene_intervals
.. autofunction:: export_entries_by_col
.. autofunction:: gather
.. autofunction:: separate
.. autofunction:: spread
.. autofunction:: full_outer_join_mt
.. autofunction:: strftime
.. autofunction:: strptime
.. autofunction:: pc_project
.. autofunction:: loop

Commit message:

[query] clarify the guarantees on hail.experimental and hail.vds

hail/python/hail/docs/experimental/index.rst, after:

Experimental
============

This module serves two functions: as a staging area for extensions of Hail
not ready for inclusion in the main package, and as a library of lightly reviewed
community submissions.

At present, the experimental module is organized into a few freestanding
modules, linked immediately below, and many freestanding functions, documented
on this page.

.. warning::

   The functionality in this module may change or disappear entirely between different versions of
   Hail. If you critically depend on functionality in this module, please create an issue to request
   promotion of that functionality to non-experimental. Otherwise, that functionality may disappear!

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    ldscsim

Contribution Guidelines
-----------------------
Submissions from the community are welcome! The criteria for inclusion in the
experimental module are loose and subject to change:

1. Function docstrings are required. Hail uses
   `NumPy style docstrings <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/stable/usage/extensions/example_numpy.html>`__.
2. Tests are not required, but are encouraged. If you do include tests, they must
   run in no more than a few seconds. Place tests as a class method on ``Tests`` in
   ``python/tests/experimental/test_experimental.py``
3. Code style is not strictly enforced, aside from egregious violations. We do
   recommend using `autopep8 <https://pypi.org/project/autopep8/>`__ though!

.. currentmodule:: hail.experimental

Annotation Database
-------------------

.. rubric:: Classes

.. autosummary::
    :nosignatures:
    :toctree: ./
    :template: class.rst

    hail.experimental.DB

Genetics Methods
----------------

.. autosummary::

    load_dataset
    ld_score
    ld_score_regression
    write_expression
    read_expression
    filtering_allele_frequency
    hail_metadata
    plot_roc_curve
    phase_by_transmission
    phase_trio_matrix_by_transmission
    explode_trio_matrix
    import_gtf
    get_gene_intervals
    export_entries_by_col
    pc_project

`dplyr`-inspired Methods
------------------------

.. autosummary::

    gather
    separate
    spread

Functions
---------

.. autofunction:: load_dataset
.. autofunction:: ld_score
.. autofunction:: ld_score_regression
.. autofunction:: write_expression
.. autofunction:: read_expression
.. autofunction:: hail_metadata
.. autofunction:: plot_roc_curve
.. autofunction:: filtering_allele_frequency
.. autofunction:: phase_by_transmission
.. autofunction:: phase_trio_matrix_by_transmission
.. autofunction:: explode_trio_matrix
.. autofunction:: import_gtf
.. autofunction:: get_gene_intervals
.. autofunction:: export_entries_by_col
.. autofunction:: gather
.. autofunction:: separate
.. autofunction:: spread
.. autofunction:: full_outer_join_mt
.. autofunction:: strftime
.. autofunction:: strptime
.. autofunction:: pc_project
.. autofunction:: loop
