# Exporting to TSVs in Hail

Hail has three export modules which write to TSVs:
 - `exportsamples`
 - `exportvariants`
 - `exportgenotypes`
 
All of these modules take a condition argument (`-c`) similar to [filtering](Filtering.md) expressions, with a similar namespace as well.  However, the expression is not parsed as a boolean, but rather a comma-delimited list of fields or expressions to print.  These fields will be printed in the order they appear in the expression in the header and on each line.  **Hail's build as of 12/21/2015 will do minimal parsing to column headers, but will default to what is written in the expression if it is not recognized.  It is possible that some users will need to use a text editor to change the column headers to what they prefer until the method is updated.**

All modules require two parameters, `-c` and `-o`.  `-c` expects a comma-separated list of fields or computations, and `-o` expects a file path to which output should be written.

## Using the export modules

 - `exportsamples` will print one line per sample in the VDS.  The accessible namespace includes:
   - `s` (sample)
   - `sa` (sample annotations)
 - `exportvariants` will print one line per variant in the VDS.  The accessible namespace includes:
   - `v` (variant)
   - `va` (variant annotations)
 - `exportgenotypes` will print one line per unique (variant, sample) in the VDS.   **WARNING: This is an operation with an output length of M x N.  Use it wisely if you value your gigabytes.** The accessible namespace includes:
   - `g` (genotype)
   - `s` (sample)
   - `sa` (sample annotations)
   - `v` (variant)
   - `va` (variant annotations). 
 
Below are examples of acceptable export commands:

```
exportsamples -c 's.id, sa.qc.rTiTv'
```
```
exportvariants -c 'v,va.pass,va.qc.MAF'
```
```
exportgenotypes -c 'v,s.id,g.gq'
```

 
## Accessible fields of exposed classes

**Genotype:** `g`
 - `g                  String` -- String representation of a genotype: looks like `GT:AD:DP:PL`
 - `g.ad:          (Int, Int)` -- allelic depth for each allele
 - `g.dp:                 Int` -- the total number of informative reads
 - `g.isHomRef:       Boolean` -- true if this call is `0/0`
 - `g.isHet:          Boolean` -- true if this call is heterozygous
 - `g.isHomVar:       Boolean` -- true if this call is `1/1`
 - `g.isCalledNonRef: Boolean` -- true if either `g.isHet` or `g.isHomVar` is true
 - `g.isCalled:       Boolean` -- true if the genotype is `./.`
 - `g.isNotCalled:    Boolean` -- true if genotype is not `./.`
 - `g.gq:                 Int` -- the value of the lowest non-zero PL, or 0 if `./.`
 - `g.nNonRef:            Int` -- the number of called alternate alleles
 - `g.pAB:             Double` -- p-value for pulling the given allelic depth from a binomial distribution
 
**Variant:** `v`
 - `v:                 String` -- String representation of a variant: looks like `CHROM_POS_REF_ALT`
 - `v.contig:          String` -- string representation of contig, exactly as imported.  _NB: Hail stores contigs as strings.  Use double-quotes when checking contig equality_
 - `v.start:              Int` -- SNP position or start of an indel
 - `v.ref:             String` -- reference allele
 - `v.alt:             String` -- Alternate allele
 - `v.wasSplit:       Boolean` -- true if this variant was originally multiallelic
 - `v.inParX:         Boolean` -- true if in pseudo-autosomal region on chromosome X
 - `v.inParY:         Boolean` -- true if in pseudo-autosomal region on chromosome Y
 - `v.isSNP:          Boolean` -- true if both `v.ref` and `v.alt` are single bases
 - `v.isMNP:          Boolean` -- true if `v.ref` and `v.alt` are the same (>1) length
 - `v.isIndel:        Boolean` -- true if `v.ref` and `v.alt` are not the same length
 - `v.isInsertion:    Boolean` -- true if `v.ref` is shorter than `v.alt`
 - `v.isDeletion:     Boolean` -- true if `v.ref` is longer than `v.alt`
 - `v.isComplex:      Boolean` -- true if `v` is not an indel, but `v.ref` and `v.alt` length do not match
 - `v.isTransition:   Boolean` -- true if the polymorphism is a purine-purine or pyrimidine-pyrimidine switch
 - `v.isTransversion: Boolean` -- true if the polymorphism is a purine-pyrimidine flip
 - `v.nMismatch:          Int` -- the total number of bases in `v.ref` and `v.alt` that do not match
 
**Sample:** `s`
 - `s.id:              String` The ID of this sample, as read at import-time 
 
**Variant Annotations:** `va`

There are no mandatory methods for annotation classes.  Annotations are generated by hail modules, like the qc modules with the `--store` option.  However, there is an exception -- when a VCF file is imported, certain fields will be saved in annotations:
 - `va.pass:          Boolean` -- true if the variant contains `PASS` in the filter field (false if `.` or other)
 - `va.filters:   Set[String]` -- set containing the list of filters applied to a variant.  Accessible using `va.filters.contains("VQSRTranche99.5...")`, for example
 - `va.qual:           Double` -- the number in the qual field
 - `va.multiallelic:  Boolean` -- true if the variant is multiallelic or was split
 - `va.info.<field>:      Any` -- matches (with proper capitalization) any defined info field.  Data types match the definition in the vcf header, and if the `Number` is "A", "R", or "G", the result will be stored in an array.
 
If `variantqc --store` has been run:
 - `va.qc.<FIELD>:        Any` -- matches (with proper capitalization) variant qc fields.  [See list of available statistics here.](QC.md)

**Sample Annotations:** `sa`

There are no mandatory methods for annotation classes.  Annotations are generated by hail modules, like the qc modules with the `--store` option.  However, the following namespace will be available if `sampleqc --store` has been run:
 - `sa.qc.<FIELD>:        Any` -- matches (with proper capitalization) variant qc fields.  [See list of available statistics here.](QC.md)

## Exporting groups of annotations

We have added two conveniences to allow easy export of groups of annotations.  As an example, we will use the [QC metrics](QC.md) which could be in the variant annotations class.  Any field in this group can be exported easily by using its identifier: `va.qc.MAF`, for example.  However, if one wants to export **all** QC statistics, there is an easier way than writing an expression with ~30 comma-separated references.
 - `va.qc              String` -- including an annotation group without specifying a field will print every field, **separated by semicolons**.  The column header will be "qc".
 - `va.qc.all          String` -- accessing the `.all` method of an annotation group will print every field, **separated by tabs**, as if each field were written individually