==========
Databricks
==========

Hail runs on a Databricks Spark cluster (AWS, Azure, or GCP) using Databricks' standard runtime —
no custom Docker image is required. Hail is installed at cluster start via an init script, and the
notebook attaches to the cluster's existing Spark context. The same setup runs on a single-node
cluster or scales across workers; you change only the worker count.

.. note::

    Hail is community-supported on Databricks, not officially supported by Databricks. Pin your
    Databricks Runtime version and re-validate after upgrades.

Requirements
------------

- **Databricks Runtime 15.4 LTS** (Apache Spark 3.5.0, Scala 2.12), non-Photon, Dedicated
  (single-user) access mode. Do not use runtimes built on Spark 4 / Scala 2.13 (e.g. DBR 17+):
  Hail is built for Scala 2.12 and Spark 3.5, which are binary-incompatible with those.
- The cluster must run on **JDK 17**. Hail's jar is Java 11 bytecode and will not load on the
  runtime's default JDK 8. Set the Spark environment variable below.

Cluster configuration
----------------------

Under **Advanced options**:

- **Spark → Environment variables:**

  .. code-block:: text

      JNAME=zulu17-ca-amd64

- **Spark → Spark config:**

  .. code-block:: text

      spark.serializer org.apache.spark.serializer.KryoSerializer
      spark.kryo.registrator is.hail.kryo.HailKryoRegistrator

- **Workers:** ``0`` for single-node, or ``2+`` to distribute Hail jobs across the cluster.

Init script
-----------

Add the following as a cluster-scoped init script (a workspace file). It runs on the driver and
every worker, placing Hail's jar on the Spark classpath.

.. warning::

    Do **not** ``pip install hail`` into the cluster's base Python. Hail pulls numpy 2.x, which
    breaks the runtime's pre-built pyarrow and prevents the notebook Python kernel from starting
    (this appears as "Could not reach driver"). Install the jar into a scratch directory with
    ``--target`` so base Python is untouched, and install the Python package from the notebook with
    ``%pip`` (below).

.. code-block:: bash

    #!/bin/bash
    set -euxo pipefail
    # Install Hail into a scratch dir so base Python (numpy/pyarrow) stays intact.
    /databricks/python3/bin/pip install --target=/tmp/hailpkg hail
    # Put Hail's jar on the Spark classpath at JVM startup (driver + all workers).
    mkdir -p /databricks/jars
    cp /tmp/hailpkg/hail/backend/hail-all-spark.jar /databricks/jars/

Install the Hail Python package
-------------------------------

In the first cell of your notebook (notebook-scoped; does not affect the kernel):

.. code-block:: text

    %pip install hail

Use Hail in a notebook
----------------------

For the most part, Hail in Databricks works identically to the rest of the Hail documentation.
The only differences are initialization (below) and displaying Bokeh plots.

Initialize Hail
---------------

Attach Hail to the cluster's pre-created ``SparkContext`` and mark initialization idempotent (this
lets multiple notebooks share the same Hail context). On a single-node cluster this runs Hail on the
driver; on a multi-node cluster the same call distributes work across the cluster.

Hail eagerly initializes a Google Cloud filesystem on startup; on AWS/Azure, set
``GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS`` to any syntactically valid (unused) service-account JSON so this
initialization succeeds.

:**note**:

  - Enable ``skip_logging_configuration`` to save logs to the rolling driver log4j output. This
    setting is supported only in Hail 0.2.39 and above.
  - Hail is not supported with `Credential passthrough
    <https://docs.databricks.com/security/credential-passthrough/index.html>`__.

:**code**:

    >>> import hail as hl
    >>> hl.init(sc, idempotent=True, quiet=True, skip_logging_configuration=True)  # doctest: +SKIP

Reading and writing data
-------------------------

- **Read** Hail Tables/MatrixTables and reference datasets directly from cloud storage using Hail's
  schemes: ``s3://`` (note: not Hadoop's ``s3a://``), ``gs://``, ``hail-az://``. On a Dedicated
  Unity Catalog cluster, Hail's S3/GCS client uses the node credentials the runtime provides.
- **Write** Hail outputs to ``/dbfs/...`` (persistent) or node-local ``/local_disk0``. Hail's own
  I/O cannot write through a Unity Catalog ``/Volumes`` path or to a UC-governed bucket via
  ``s3://`` (those require Unity Catalog credential vending that Hail's client bypasses). To land
  results in a governed Delta table, write from Hail to ``/dbfs`` and then read that with Spark and
  save the table.

Display Bokeh plots
-------------------

Hail uses the `Bokeh <https://docs.bokeh.org/en/latest/>`__ library to create plots. The `show`
function built into Bokeh does not work in Databricks. To display a Bokeh plot generated by Hail,
you can run a command like:

    >>> from bokeh.embed import components, file_html
    >>> from bokeh.resources import CDN
    >>> plot = hl.plot.histogram(mt.DP, range=(0,30), bins=30, title='DP Histogram', legend='DP')
    >>> html = file_html(plot, CDN, "Chart")

And then call the Databricks function `displayHTML` with `html` as its argument.

See Databricks' `Bokeh docs <https://docs.databricks.com/notebooks/visualizations/bokeh.html>`__ for
more information.

Optional: Databricks Container Services
---------------------------------------

If your organization requires a locked-down "golden" image, you can instead bake the steps above
into a custom Docker image based on ``databricksruntime/standard:15.4-LTS`` (install Hail, place the
jar on the classpath, set JDK 17) and run it via `Databricks Container Services
<https://docs.databricks.com/clusters/custom-containers.html>`__. If you do, you are responsible for
building and maintaining that image.
